okay so i'm going to attempt a
walkthrough of question 16 from november
paper one and take it slowly step by
step and hopefully we can all understand
this question together i had trouble the
first time i attempted it
the a cell is connected in series with a
2 ohm resistor and a switch the
voltmeter is connected across the cell
and reads 12 volts when the switch is
open and 8 volts when the switch is
closed
okay
so what is the internal resistance of
the cell so internal resistance of the
cell means that there is a a little
resistor in here or the cell itself has
a certain resistance and we need to
figure out what that happens to be
so let's just simply ignore the fact
that there is a hidden resistor in here
at the moment and concentrate on the
fact that it says
when the switch is closed
so when the circuit is complete
you've got eight volts
are coming out of this battery and going
through this here
resistor
okay so
we've got eight volts going through the
two ohm resistor so if the voltmeter is
reading eight volts here then we may as
well just assume that the battery itself
is
pumping out eight volts worth of
pressure behind the current that's going
through this two ohm resistor so let's
apply ohm's law here v equals i r
substitute in
for the voltage coming out of the
battery
and the current we don't yet know what
that is until we've completed the
problem but it's i times 2 ohms on the
resistor and so solving that clearly
we've got that the current is equal to 4
amps
all right so 4 amps is now flowing
through this 2 ohm resistor
now notice that says a cell is connected
in series
we should remember again from
year 11 that in a series circuit
the current through all the components
is equal
so the current that is going through
this resistor that's actually hidden
from us
there in series with the battery has a
current of also four amps going through
it
now the other thing to realize with this
problem is that when the switch is open
the voltmeter reads 12 volts
when it's closed it reads 8 volts
so there's a missing 4 volts
the
opening of the
the opening of the
switch there
means that
the battery itself all on its own
has
an emf an electromotive force of 12
volts
now how do we know that well because if
there's nothing else in the circuit
apart from a resistor so in other words
if the circuit just looks like that
then the total voltage in the entire
circuit is 12 volts
if the total voltage in the entire
circuit is 12 volts and the only place
that the voltage is coming from is that
cell there then the cell itself must
have an emf of 12 volts and that entire
12 volts is going through the transistor
so there's 12 volts in this scenario
when the
cell when the switch is open
now if we
close the switch and then allow the
voltage which is originally 12
to also go through this 2 ohm resistor
then the reading on the voltmeter drops
to 8 volts
we know that the eight volts is going
through here
where's the other four going
the other four's going through this
resistor here
and so if that's the case
if we've got four volts going through
this
resistor and we also know from the
previous
calculation that we did that four amps
is going through the resistor
then if we simply
apply ohm's law for a second time that
there's four volts going through that
resistor
with a current of 4 volts as well
the unknown resistance using this little
formula
must be
and so that's why the answer is a
hopefully that made a little bit more
sense i certainly confused myself when
attempting to do this
just remember that in a
series circuit the
currents in a series circuit are all the
same so the current through this unknown
resistor and the current through the 2
ohm resistor is the same
but the voltages have to add up to the
total voltage
and we know the total voltage is
actually 12 volts
and we know that 8 volts was going
through this two ohm resistor
so eight plus something gives us twelve
at eight
plus something that is four okay four
volts
and the four amps was given to us by
figuring out
how much current was going through the 2
ohm resistor given there was 8 volts
going through it so hopefully that's a
little bit more clear and
i i'm not confusing anyone any further